The Project Gutenberg eBook of When a Man Comes to Himself, by Woodrow Wilson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: When a Man Comes to Himself

Author: Woodrow Wilson

Release Date: April 16, 2002 [eBook #5078]
[Most recently updated: October 17, 2021]

Language: English


Produced by: Jennifer Godwin and Jose Menendez

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEN A MAN COMES TO HIMSELF ***

[Illustration]




When a Man Comes to Himself

by Woodrow Wilson
Ph.D., Litt.D., LL.D.

President of the United States

1901.


Contents

 I.
 II.
 III.
 IV.
 V.
 VI.




I


It is a very wholesome and regenerating change which a man undergoes
when he “comes to himself.” It is not only after periods of
recklessness or infatuation, when he has played the spendthrift or the
fool, that a man comes to himself. He comes to himself after
experiences of which he alone may be aware: when he has left off being
wholly preoccupied with his own powers and interests and with every
petty plan that centers in himself; when he has cleared his eyes to see
the world as it is, and his own true place and function in it.

It is a process of disillusionment. The scales have fallen away. He
sees himself soberly, and knows under what conditions his powers must
act, as well as what his powers are. He has got rid of earlier
prepossessions about the world of men and affairs, both those which
were too favorable and those which were too unfavorable—both those of
the nursery and those of a young man’s reading. He has learned his own
paces, or, at any rate, is in a fair way to learn them; has found his
footing and the true nature of the “going” he must look for in the
world; over what sorts of roads he must expect to make his running, and
at what expenditure of effort; whither his goal lies, and what cheer he
may expect by the way. It is a process of disillusionment, but it
disheartens no soundly made man. It brings him into a light which
guides instead of deceiving him; a light which does not make the way
look cold to any man whose eyes are fit for use in the open, but which
shines wholesomely, rather upon the obvious path, like the honest rays
of the frank sun, and makes traveling both safe and cheerful.




II


There is no fixed time in a man’s life at which he comes to himself,
and some men never come to themselves at all. It is a change reserved
for the thoroughly sane and healthy, and for those who can detach
themselves from tasks and drudgery long and often enough to get, at any
rate once and again, a view of the proportions of life and of the stage
and plot of its action. We speak often with amusement, sometimes with
distaste and uneasiness, of men who “have no sense of humor,” who take
themselves too seriously, who are intense, self-absorbed,
over-confident in matters of opinion, or else go plumed with conceit,
proud of we cannot tell what, enjoying, appreciating, thinking of
nothing so much as themselves. These are men who have not suffered that
wholesome change. They have not come to themselves. If they be serious
men, and real forces in the world, we may conclude that they have been
too much and too long absorbed; that their tasks and responsibilities
long ago rose about them like a flood, and have kept them swimming with
sturdy stroke the years through, their eyes level with the troubled
surface—no horizon in sight, no passing fleets, no comrades but those
who struggled in the flood like themselves. If they be frivolous,
light-headed men without purpose or achievement, we may conjecture, if
we do not know, that they were born so, or spoiled by fortune, or
befuddled by self-indulgence. It is no great matter what we think of
them.

It is enough to know that there are some laws which govern a man’s
awakening to know himself and the right part to play. A man _is_ the
part he plays among his fellows. He is not isolated; he cannot be. His
life is made up of the relations he bears to others—is made or marred
by those relations, guided by them, judged by them, expressed in them.
There is nothing else upon which he can spend his spirit—nothing else
that we can see. It is by these he gets his spiritual growth; it is by
these we see his character revealed, his purpose and his gifts. Some
play with a certain natural passion, an unstudied directness, without
grace, without modulation, with no study of the masters or
consciousness of the pervading spirit of the plot; others give all
their thought to their costume and think only of the audience; a few
act as those who have mastered the secrets of a serious art, with
deliberate subordination of themselves to the great end and motive of
the play, spending themselves like good servants, indulging no
wilfulness, obtruding no eccentricity, lending heart and tone and
gesture to the perfect progress of the action. These have “found
themselves,” and have all the ease of a perfect adjustment.

Adjustment is exactly what a man gains when he comes to himself. Some
men gain it late, some early; some get it all at once, as if by one
distinct act of deliberate accommodation; others get it by degrees and
quite imperceptibly. No doubt to most men it comes by slow processes of
experience—at each stage of life a little. A college man feels the
first shock of it at graduation, when the boy’s life has been lived out
and the man’s life suddenly begins. He has measured himself with boys;
he knows their code and feels the spur of their ideals of achievement.
But what the world expects of him he has yet to find out, and it works,
when he has discovered, a veritable revolution in his ways both of
thought and of action. He finds a new sort of fitness demanded of him,
executive, thorough-going, careful of details, full of drudgery and
obedience to orders. Everybody is ahead of him. Just now he was a
senior, at the top of the world he knows and reigned in, a finished
product and pattern of good form. Of a sudden he is a novice again, as
green as in his first school year, studying a thing that seems to have
no rules—at sea amid crosswinds, and a bit seasick withal. Presently,
if he be made of stuff that will shake into shape and fitness, he
settles to his tasks and is comfortable. He has come to himself:
understands what capacity is, and what it is meant for; sees that his
training was not for ornament or personal gratification, but to teach
him how to use himself and develop faculties worth using. Henceforth
there is a zest in action, and he loves to see his strokes tell.

The same thing happens to the lad come from the farm into the city, a
big and novel field, where crowds rush and jostle, and a rustic boy
must stand puzzled for a little how to use his placid and unjaded
strength. It happens, too, though in a deeper and more subtle way, to
the man who marries for love, if the love be true and fit for foul
weather. Mr. Bagehot used to say that a bachelor was “an amateur at
life,” and wit and wisdom are married in the jest. A man who lives only
for himself has not begun to live—has yet to learn his use, and his
real pleasure, too, in the world. It is not necessary he should marry
to find himself out, but it is necessary he should love. Men have come
to themselves serving their mothers with an unselfish devotion, or
their sisters, or a cause for whose sake they forsook ease and left off
thinking of themselves. It is unselfish action, growing slowly into the
high habit of devotion, and at last, it may be, into a sort of
consecration, that teaches a man the wide meaning of his life, and
makes of him a steady professional in living, if the motive be not
necessity, but love. Necessity may make a mere drudge of a man, and no
mere drudge ever made a professional of himself; that demands a higher
spirit and a finer incentive than his.




III


Surely a man has come to himself only when he has found the best that
is in him, and has satisfied his heart with the highest achievement he
is fit for. It is only then that he knows of what he is capable and
what his heart demands. And, assuredly, no thoughtful man ever came to
the end of his life, and had time and a little space of calm from which
to look back upon it, who did not know and acknowledge that it was what
he had done unselfishly and for others, and nothing else, that
satisfied him in the retrospect, and made him feel that he had played
the man. That alone seems to him the real measure of himself, the real
standard of his manhood. And so men grow by having responsibility laid
upon them, the burden of other people’s business. Their powers are put
out at interest, and they get usury in kind. They are like men
multiplied. Each counts manifold. Men who live with an eye only upon
what is their own are dwarfed beside them—seem fractions while they are
integers. The trustworthiness of men trusted seems often to grow with
the trust.

It is for this reason that men are in love with power and greatness: it
affords them so pleasurable an expansion of faculty, so large a run for
their minds, an exercise of spirit so various and refreshing; they have
the freedom of so wide a tract of the world of affairs. But if they use
power only for their own ends, if there be no unselfish service in it,
if its object be only their personal aggrandizement, their love to see
other men tools in their hands, they go out of the world small,
disquieted, beggared, no enlargement of soul vouchsafed them, no usury
of satisfaction. They have added nothing to themselves. Mental and
physical powers alike grow by use, as every one knows; but labor for
oneself is like exercise in a gymnasium. No healthy man can remain
satisfied with it, or regard it as anything but a preparation for tasks
in the open, amid the affairs of the world—not sport, but
business—where there is no orderly apparatus, and every man must devise
the means by which he is to make the most of himself. To make the most
of himself means the multiplication of his activities, and he must turn
away from himself for that. He looks about him, studies the facts of
business or of affairs, catches some intimation of their larger
objects, is guided by the intimation, and presently finds himself part
of the motive force of communities or of nations. It makes no
difference how small a part, how insignificant, how unnoticed. When his
powers begin to play outward, and he loves the task at hand, not
because it gains him a livelihood, but because it makes him a life, he
has come to himself.

Necessity is no mother to enthusiasm. Necessity carries a whip. Its
method is compulsion, not love. It has no thought to make itself
attractive; it is content to drive. Enthusiasm comes with the
revelation of true and satisfying objects of devotion; and it is
enthusiasm that sets the powers free. It is a sort of enlightenment. It
shines straight upon ideals, and for those who see it the race and
struggle are henceforth toward these. An instance will point the
meaning. One of the most distinguished and most justly honored of our
great philanthropists spent the major part of his life absolutely
absorbed in the making of money—so it seemed to those who did not know
him. In fact, he had very early passed the stage at which he looked
upon his business as a means of support or of material comfort.
Business had become for him an intellectual pursuit, a study in
enterprise and increment. The field of commerce lay before him like a
chess-board; the moves interested him like the manoeuvers of a game.
More money was more power, a great advantage in the game, the means of
shaping men and events and markets to his own ends and uses. It was his
will that set fleets afloat and determined the havens they were bound
for; it was his foresight that brought goods to market at the right
time; it was his suggestion that made the industry of unthinking men
efficacious; his sagacity saw itself justified at home not only, but at
the ends of the earth. And as the money poured in, his government and
mastery increased, and his mind was the more satisfied. It is so that
men make little kingdoms for themselves, and an international power
undarkened by diplomacy, undirected by parliaments.




IV


It is a mistake to suppose that the great captains of industry, the
great organizers and directors of manufacture and commerce and monetary
exchange, are engrossed in a vulgar pursuit of wealth. Too often they
suffer the vulgarity of wealth to display itself in the idleness and
ostentation of their wives and children, who “devote themselves,” it
may be, “to expense regardless of pleasure”; but we ought not to
misunderstand even that, or condemn it unjustly. The masters of
industry are often too busy with their own sober and momentous calling
to have time or spare thought enough to govern their own households. A
king may be too faithful a statesman to be a watchful father. These men
are not fascinated by the glitter of gold: the appetite for power has
got hold upon them. They are in love with the exercise of their
faculties upon a great scale; they are organizing and overseeing a
great part of the life of the world. No wonder they are captivated.
Business is more interesting than pleasure, as Mr. Bagehot said, and
when once the mind has caught its zest, there’s no disengaging it. The
world has reason to be grateful for the fact.

It was this fascination that had got hold upon the faculties of the man
whom the world was afterward to know, not as a prince among
merchants—for the world forgets merchant princes—but as a prince among
benefactors; for beneficence breeds gratitude, gratitude admiration,
admiration fame, and the world remembers its benefactors. Business, and
business alone, interested him, or seemed to him worthwhile. The first
time he was asked to subscribe money for a benevolent object he
declined. Why _should_ he subscribe? What affair would be set forward,
what increase of efficiency would the money buy, what return would it
bring in? Was good money to be simply given away, like water poured on
a barren soil, to be sucked up and yield nothing? It was not until men
who understood benevolence on its sensible, systematic, practical, and
really helpful side explained it to him as an investment that his mind
took hold of it and turned to it for satisfaction. He began to see that
education was a thing of infinite usury; that money devoted to it would
yield a singular increase to which there was no calculable end, an
increase in perpetuity—increase of knowledge, and therefore of
intelligence and efficiency, touching generation after generation with
new impulses, adding to the sum total of the world’s fitness for
affairs—an invisible but intensely real spiritual usury beyond
reckoning, because compounded in an unknown ratio from age to age.
Henceforward beneficence was as interesting to him as business—was,
indeed, a sort of sublimated business in which money moved new forces
in a commerce which no man could bind or limit.

He had come to himself—to the full realization of his powers, the true
and clear perception of what it was his mind demanded for its
satisfaction. His faculties were consciously stretched to their right
measure, were at last exercised at their best. He felt the keen zest,
not of success merely, but also of honor, and was raised to a sort of
majesty among his fellow-men, who attended him in death like a dead
sovereign. He had died dwarfed had he not broken the bonds of mere
money-getting; would never have known himself had he not learned how to
spend it; and ambition itself could not have shown him a straighter
road to fame.

This is the positive side of a man’s discovery of the way in which his
faculties are to be made to fit into the world’s affairs, and released
for effort in a way that will bring real satisfaction. There is a
negative side also. Men come to themselves by discovering their
limitations no less than by discovering their deeper endowments and the
mastery that will make them happy. It is the discovery of what they can
_not_ do, and ought not to attempt, that transforms reformers into
statesmen; and great should be the joy of the world over every reformer
who comes to himself. The spectacle is not rare; the method is not
hidden. The practicability of every reform is determined absolutely and
always by “the circumstances of the case,” and only those who put
themselves into the midst of affairs, either by action or by
observation, can know what those circumstances are or perceive what
they signify. No statesman dreams of doing whatever he pleases; he
knows that it does not follow that because a point of morals or of
policy is obvious to him it will be obvious to the nation, or even to
his own friends; and it is the strength of a democratic polity that
there are so many minds to be consulted and brought to agreement, and
that nothing can be wisely done for which the thought, and a good deal
more than the thought, of the country, its sentiment and its purpose,
have not been prepared. Social reform is a matter of cooperation, and
if it be of a novel kind, requires an infinite deal of converting to
bring the efficient majority to believe in it and support it. Without
their agreement and support it is impossible.




V


It is this that the more imaginative and impatient reformers find out
when they come to themselves, if that calming change ever comes to
them. Oftentimes the most immediate and drastic means of bringing them
to themselves is to elect them to legislative or executive office. That
will reduce over-sanguine persons to their simplest terms. Not because
they find their fellow-legislators or officials incapable of high
purpose or indifferent to the betterment of the communities which they
represent. Only cynics hold that to be the chief reason why we approach
the millennium so slowly, and cynics are usually very ill-informed
persons. Nor is it because under our modern democratic arrangements we
so subdivide power and balance parts in government that no one man can
tell for much or turn affairs to his will. One of the most instructive
studies a politician could undertake would be a study of the infinite
limitations laid upon the power of the Russian Czar, notwithstanding
the despotic theory of the Russian constitution—limitations of social
habit, of official prejudice, of race jealousies, of religious
predilections, of administrative machinery even, and the inconvenience
of being himself only one man, caught amidst a rush of duties and
responsibilities which never halt or pause. He can do only what can be
done with the Russian people. He cannot change them at will. He is
himself of their own stuff, and immersed in the life which forms them,
as it forms him. He is simply the leader of the Russians.

An English or American statesman is better off. He leads a thinking
nation, not a race of peasants topped by a class of revolutionists and
a caste of nobles and officials. He can explain new things to men able
to understand, persuade men willing and accustomed to make independent
and intelligent choices of their own. An English statesman has an even
better opportunity to lead than an American statesman, because in
England executive power and legislative initiative are both intrusted
to the same grand committee, the ministry of the day. The ministers
both propose what shall be law and determine how it shall be enforced
when enacted. And yet English reformers, like American, have found
office a veritable cold-water bath for their ardor for change. Many a
man who has made his place in affairs as the spokesman of those who see
abuses and demand their reformation has passed from denunciation to
calm and moderate advice when he got into Parliament, and has turned
veritable conservative when made a minister of the crown. Mr. Bright
was a notable example. Slow and careful men had looked upon him as
little better than a revolutionist so long as his voice rang free and
imperious from the platforms of public meetings. They greatly feared
the influence he should exercise in Parliament, and would have deemed
the constitution itself unsafe could they have foreseen that he would
some day be invited to take office and a hand of direction in affairs.
But it turned out that there was nothing to fear. Mr. Bright lived to
see almost every reform he had urged accepted and embodied in
legislation; but he assisted at the process of their realization with
greater and greater temperateness and wise deliberation as his part in
affairs became more and more prominent and responsible, and was at the
last as little like an agitator as any man that served the queen.

It is not that such men lose courage when they find themselves charged
with the actual direction of the affairs concerning which they have
held and uttered such strong, unhesitating, drastic opinions. They have
only learned discretion. For the first time they see in its entirety
what it was that they were attempting. They are at last at close
quarters with the world. Men of every interest and variety crowd about
them; new impressions throng them; in the midst of affairs the former
special objects of their zeal fall into new environments, a better and
truer perspective; seem no longer so susceptible to separate and
radical change. The real nature of the complex stuff of life they were
seeking to work in is revealed to them—its intricate and delicate
fiber, and the subtle, secret interrelationship of its parts—and they
work circumspectly, lest they should mar more than they mend. Moral
enthusiasm is not, uninstructed and of itself, a suitable guide to
practicable and lasting reformation; and if the reform sought be the
reformation of others as well as of himself, the reformer should look
to it that he knows the true relation of his will to the wills of those
he would change and guide. When he has discovered that relation, he has
come to himself: has discovered his real use and planning part in the
general world of men; has come to the full command and satisfying
employment of his faculties. Otherwise he is doomed to live for ever in
a fool’s paradise, and can be said to have come to himself only on the
supposition that he is a fool.




VI


Every man—if I may adopt and paraphrase a passage from Dr. South—every
man hath both an absolute and a relative capacity: an absolute in that
he hath been endued with such a nature and such parts and faculties;
and a relative in that he is part of the universal community of men,
and so stands in such a relation to the whole. When we say that a man
has come to himself, it is not of his absolute capacity that we are
thinking, but of his relative. He has begun to realize that he is part
of a whole, and to know _what_ part, suitable for what service and
achievement.

It was once fashionable—and that not a very long time ago—to speak of
political society with a certain distaste, as a necessary evil, an
irritating but inevitable restriction upon the “natural” sovereignty
and entire self-government of the individual. That was the dream of the
egotist. It was a theory in which men were seen to strut in the proud
consciousness of their several and “absolute” capacities. It would be
as instructive as it would be difficult to count the errors it has bred
in political thinking. As a matter of fact, men have never dreamed of
wishing to do without the “trammels” of organized society, for the very
good reason that those trammels are in reality but no trammels at all,
but indispensable aids and spurs to the attainment of the highest and
most enjoyable things man is capable of. Political society, the life of
men in states, is an abiding natural relationship. It is neither a mere
convenience nor a mere necessity. It is not a mere voluntary
association, not a mere corporation. It is nothing deliberate or
artificial, devised for a special purpose. It is in real truth the
eternal and natural expression and embodiment of a form of life higher
than that of the individual—that common life of mutual helpfulness,
stimulation, and contest which gives leave and opportunity to the
individual life, makes it possible, makes it full and complete.

It is in such a scene that man looks about to discover his own place
and force. In the midst of men organized, infinitely cross-related,
bound by ties of interest, hope, affection, subject to authorities, to
opinion, to passion, to visions and desires which no man can reckon, he
casts eagerly about to find where he may enter in with the rest and be
a man among his fellows. In making his place he finds, if he seek
intelligently and with eyes that see, more than ease of spirit and
scope for his mind. He finds himself—as if mists had cleared away about
him and he knew at last his neighborhood among men and tasks.

What every man seeks is satisfaction. He deceives himself so long as he
imagines it to lie in self-indulgence, so long as he deems himself the
center and object of effort. His mind is spent in vain upon itself. Not
in action itself, not in “pleasure,” shall it find its desires
satisfied, but in consciousness of right, of powers greatly and nobly
spent. It comes to know itself in the motives which satisfy it, in the
zest and power of rectitude. Christianity has liberated the world, not
as a system of ethics, not as a philosophy of altruism, but by its
revelation of the power of pure and unselfish love. Its vital principle
is not its code, but its motive. Love, clear-sighted, loyal, personal,
is its breath and immortality. Christ came, not to save Himself,
assuredly, but to save the world. His motive, His example, are every
man’s key to his own gifts and happiness. The ethical code he taught
may no doubt be matched, here a piece and there a piece, out of other
religions, other teachings and philosophies. Every thoughtful man born
with a conscience must know a code of right and of pity to which he
ought to conform; but without the motive of Christianity, without love,
he may be the purest altruist and yet be as sad and as unsatisfied as
Marcus Aurelius.

Christianity gave us, in the fullness of time, the perfect image of
right living, the secret of social and of individual well-being; for
the two are not separable, and the man who receives and verifies that
secret in his own living has discovered not only the best and only way
to serve the world, but also the one happy way to satisfy himself.
Then, indeed, has he come to himself. Henceforth he knows what his
powers mean, what spiritual air they breathe, what ardors of service
clear them of lethargy, relieve them of all sense of effort, put them
at their best. After this fretfulness passes away, experience mellows
and strengthens and makes more fit, and old age brings, not senility,
not satiety, not regret, but higher hope and serene maturity.

THE END




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEN A MAN COMES TO HIMSELF ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

